# Quick sort

- Quick Sort is a divide-and-conquer algorithm like the Merge Sort.
- But unlike Merge sort, this algorithm does not use any extra array for sorting(though it uses an auxiliary stack space).
- So, from that perspective, Quick sort is slightly better than Merge sort.

## Intuition:

- This algorithm is basically a repetition of two simple steps that are the following:

    - Pick a `pivot` and place it in its correct place in the sorted array.

    - Shift smaller elements`(i.e. Smaller than the pivot)` on the left of the pivot and larger ones to the right.

- A pivot is basically a chosen element of the given array. The element or the pivot can be chosen by our choice. So, in an array a pivot can be any of the following:
    - The first element of the array
    - The last element of the array
    - Median of array
    - Any Random element of the array

## Steps

- Initially, the low points to the first index and the high points to the last index(as the range is n i.e. the size of the array). 

- After that, we will get the index(where the pivot should be placed after sorting) while shifting the smaller elements on the left and the larger ones on the right using a `partition() function` discussed later.
    - Now, this index can be called the `partition index` as it creates a partition between the left and the right unsorted subarrays.

- After placing the pivot in the partition index(within the partition() function specified), we need to call the function `quickSort()`for the left and the right subarray recursively. So, the range of the left subarray will be `[low to (partition index – 1)]` and the range of the right subarray will be `[(partition index + 1) to high]. `

- This is how the recursion will continue until the range becomes 1.

### Now, let’s understand how to implement the `partition()` function to get the partition index.  


- Inside the function, we will first select the pivot(i.e. arr[low] in our case).

- Now, we will again take two-pointers i and j. The i pointer points to low and the j points to high

- Now, the pointer `i will move forward` 
and find the first element that is ***greater*** than the pivot. Similarly, the `pointer j will move backward` and find the first element that is ***smaller*** than the pivot.  
    - Here, we need to add some checks like i <= high-1 and j >= low+1. Because it might happen that i is standing at high and trying to proceed or j is standing at low and trying to exceed.

- Once we find such elements i.e. `arr[i] > pivot and arr[j] < pivot,` and `i < j`, we will swap `arr[i] and arr[j]`.

- We will continue step 3 and step 4, until `j becomes smaller than i`.

- Finally, we will swap the pivot element`(i.e. arr[low])` with `arr[j]` and will return the index j i.e. the partition index.

## Code

```C++
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

int partition(vector<int> &arr, int low, int high) {
    int pivot = arr[low];
    int i = low;
    int j = high;

    while (i < j) {
        while (arr[i] <= pivot && i <= high - 1) {
            i++;
        }

        while (arr[j] > pivot && j >= low + 1) {
            j--;
        }
        if (i < j) swap(arr[i], arr[j]);
    }
    swap(arr[low], arr[j]);
    return j;
}

void qs(vector<int> &arr, int low, int high) {
    if (low < high) {
        int pIndex = partition(arr, low, high);
        qs(arr, low, pIndex - 1);
        qs(arr, pIndex + 1, high);
    }
}

vector<int> quickSort(vector<int> arr) {
    qs(arr, 0, arr.size() - 1);
    return arr;
}

int main()
{
    vector<int> arr = {4, 6, 2, 5, 7, 9, 1, 3};
    int n = arr.size();
    cout << "Before Using quick Sort: " << endl;
    for (int i = 0; i < n; i++)
    {
        cout << arr[i] << " ";
    }
    cout << endl;

    arr = quickSort(arr);
    cout << "After Using quick sort: " << "\n";
    for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
        cout << arr[i] << " ";
    }
    cout << "\n";
    return 0;
}
```

## Time complexity:
- O(N*logN), where N = size of the array.
- `Reason:` At each step, we divide the whole array, for that logN and n steps are taken for the partition() function, so overall time complexity will be N*logN.
- The following recurrence relation can be written for Quick sort : 
  - `F(n) = F(k) + F(n-1-k) `
- Here k is the number of elements smaller or equal to the pivot and n-1-k denotes elements greater than the pivot.

- `There can be 2 cases :`

    - `Worst Case` – This case occurs when the pivot is the greatest or smallest element of the array. If the partition is done and the last element is the pivot, then the worst case would be either in the increasing order of the array or in the decreasing order of the array. 
        - `Recurrence`:F(n) = F(0)+F(n-1)  or  F(n) = F(n-1) + F(0) 

    - `Best Case`– This case occurs when the pivot is the middle element or near to middle element of the array.
        - `Recurrence` : F(n) = 2F(n/2)

- Time Complexity for the best and average case: `O(N*logN)`

## Space Complexity: 
- O(1) + O(N) auxiliary stack space.